---
title: "What are Vectors and Why Store Them in a Vector Database?"
slug: what-are-vectors
authors:
  - "kay"
tags: [vector, upstash, llm, ai]
---

With the rise of large language models (LLMs) like GPT, you probably noticed the 
increased demand for vector databases. They are praised as “infinite memory for 
LLMs,” but what that means might not be clear to everyone. 

If you’re a bit confused about why you might need yet another database for your 
next project if you want to include an LLM or generally need a refresher in 
vectors, then this is the right article for you. It will explain vectors and 
vector databases, and illustrate their usage with practical examples.

# What is a Vector?

A vector is a geometrical object that has a length and a direction. It starts at 
one point and ends at another. Figure 1 illustrates a 2D vector going from point 
A to point B. 


![Figure 1: 2D vector](/blog/what-are-vectors/2dvector.png)
Figure 1: 2D vector


As you can see, the vector has a direction from A (1,3) to B (4,1). It also has 
a length but is not explicitly defined; we must calculate it. We can use the 
hypotenuse formula for this, just like in school. 


```
a = 3 - 1 = 2
b = 4 - 1 = 3
a² + b² = c²
2² + 3² = 4 + 9 = 13 = c²
3.61 ~= c
```


So, the length of our vector is around `3.61`.

While this small exercise might seem boring, it illustrates an important 
property of vectors: They come with a mathematical foundation called vector 
algebra that allows us to analyze them precisely. Just what we need when writing 
software with it! 

If we know how to calculate the relations between points through vectors, we can 
use this to model (hint hint) all kinds of things from the real world in our 
software.


### How are Vectors Represented in Code?

There are several ways to represent a vector in code. We could save it as an 
object like this:

```javascript
const v = {
  startX: 1,
  startY: 3,
  endX: 4,
  endY: 1
}
```


However, since the interesting part of a vector is its length and direction 
(i.e., when rendering a pixel, we want to know where to display it, not how far 
it's away from other pixels), we can omit some parts. If we move all vectors to 
(0,0), we don’t have to save that point, as it’s always the same. 

In Figure 2, you see that a moved vector, also known as a translated vector, has 
the same direction and length but starts in a different place.


![Figure 2: Moved 2D vector](/blog/what-are-vectors/moved2dvector.png)
Figure 2: Moved 2D vector

In our case, that place is the point (0,0), so we can omit it in our 
representation. This leaves us with `endX` and `endY`; since they always come in 
the same order, we can put them in an array of size two.


```javascript
const v = [3,-2]
```


If you see a vector represented like this, you can assume it starts at the 
center of the coordination system. For example, a 3D vector `[4,2,5]` would 
begin with `[0,0,0]` even if it has more dimensions than two.

This brings us to the next important property of vectors: they can have an 
arbitrary number of dimensions. While only two or three dimensions make sense 
in visual applications, there are other applications, like recommendation 
engines or LLMs, where many more dimensions are useful. 

More than three dimensions might sound abstract, but it makes more sense to 
imagine a dimension less like a geometrical direction and more like a 
characteristic. Take a T-shirt, for example. It has a color, a size, a price, a 
material, etc. Despite more than three properties, each could be represented as 
a vector dimension.


### Practical Examples of Vectors

There are many different applications of vectors in software development, some 
more obvious than others.


#### Computer Graphics

The most obvious example is using 2D vectors to represent pixels on a screen. 

    [752,330]

If you used HTML and CSS, you might have encountered 3D vectors in 2D 
visualizations. Here, the third dimension is the z-index, which decides which 
element is rendered last and will hide all other elements with a lower z-index. 
The vectors are part of the CSS properties of each HTML element.

    {x:723,y:544,z-index:99}

Applications like video games use three dimensions to represent points in a 3D 
space. 

    [923,123,33]

In fact, they often use four dimensions since they make some common 3D 
calculations easier. These applications have to transfer the 3D points to the 2D 
pixels of your screen to display them, which is called projection.


#### Recommendation Engines

A more advanced example of vector usage is a recommendation engine. Here, the 
dimensions are the properties of items. This could be wares like clothes and 
social media posts or videos. This example has nothing to do with visual 
representations, so there can be more than three dimensions. Nevertheless, as 
all vectors adhere to the rules of vector algebra, we can use them to do 
meaningful calculations with them. 

You could represent a movie with a vector that contains its length, resolution, 
and release date—all numbers, so it’s not too complicated. 

The following vector represents a ninety-minute movie with full-HD resolution 
from 2010:

    [5400,1080,1265538522]

When a user watches the movie, you can save the corresponding vector. After 
saving a reasonable amount, you can calculate a vector representing the user's 
movie preference. 

When you need to recommend movies in the future, you can compare the user's 
preference vector to a movie vector and list the closest movies. The user may 
only watch short movies or prefer movies from a certain time in the past. 

#### Machine Learning

You might have noticed that recommending movies based on their length and 
release dates probably won’t yield the best results. That’s where machine 
learning (ML) comes into play. 

With ML, you teach an algorithm to categorize different items, which essentially
means assigning vectors to them automatically. This is helpful since it’s often 
hard to decide how many dimensions a vector should have, let alone what values 
each dimension needs. Such a system can analyze an image and assign a huge 
vector that could encode information like how many people are in this image, 
what type of clothes they are wearing, and which painting style was used to 
create it, etc. 

In the case of an LLM, a system has to learn how to form reasonable sentences by 
assigning each word a vector that encodes where it can use the word. This could 
require hundreds or thousands of dimensions, so it wouldn’t be feasible for 
humans to do it manually.

Now that you understand what vectors are and their use cases in different types 
of software, let’s look at vector databases.  

## What’s a Vector Database?

A vector database is optimized for storing and querying vectors and their 
related metadata. 

Each database has a different, unique selling point. MySQL helps with data 
deduplication, Redis is for high-performance data retrieval, and ElasticSearch 
enables your app to do full-text searches.

Vector databases like Upstash Vector let you query records via approximate 
nearest neighbor (ANN) algorithms. As discussed above, you have a vector and 
want a list of vectors that are in some way related to it. Think of it a bit 
like ElasticSearch, but instead of using different text storage and search 
methods, it uses vector algebra. 

A record's metadata in a vector database usually contains information related to 
that vector. For example, if you have a vector for an image, the metadata could 
include a URL to that image. 


### How to Query a Vector Database?

Vector databases offer different ANN algorithms to query the data. As the 
approximate part of ANN implies, this isn’t a 100% accurate way to get the 
nearest neighbor, but the alternative is a full table scan for each query, which 
is unfeasible in practice. Upstash Vector uses DiskANN to query indexes directly
from SSD and enhances it with FreshDiskANN for memory access of recently changed
data. 

You must choose a vector similarity function when creating an index for a vector
database. Upstash Vector offers three of them. Let’s check them out!


#### Euclidean Distance

Euclidean distance is the easiest function. It simply measures the distance
between two vectors.

It is useful in cases where you want to know how close the end point of a vector
is to another one. `[1,1]` and `[10000,10000]` have the same direction, but
they aren’t close to each other. For example, in a 2D game, you might only load
vectors close to a player entity but nothing outside their viewport to improve
performance.


#### Cosine Similarity

The result of the cosine similarity function doesn’t measure the distance
between two vectors but the difference in their direction. 

It is useful for recommendation engines that operate on many dimensions. Let’s
take the movie recommendation again as an example.

If we have 3 genres, action, comedy, and drama, the vectors representing each
movie would have 3 dimensions.

* An action movie vector looks like this `[1,0,0]`
* A comedy movie vector looks like this `[0,1,0]`
* A drama movie vector looks like this `[0,0,1]`

If a user watches 8 comedies and 2 dramas, their preference vector looks like
this `[0,8,2]`. 

As we don’t expect movies with values other than 1 and 0, there can’t be a 
comedy movie that is “more comedy” (i.e., a comedy value bigger than 1) than 
another comedy movie. It’s enough to check if the movie vector points in a 
similar direction as the preference vector; we don’t need to check how “far into
that direction” it points. 

Cosine similarity will return values between 1 and -1, depending on how well the
vector directions align. This is the case if the user watched 10 or 1000 movies. 


#### Dot Product

The dot product will include length and direction in the calculation. Meaning, 
vectors aren’t just similar when they point in the same direction, but also when 
they have a similar length.

In our previous recommendation engine example, we only allowed movies to have 1 
or 0 values. While it’s a matter of personal taste if one comedy movie is 
funnier than another, there are reasonable use cases where the magnitude of a 
dimension might be crucial. 

We could include an additional runtime dimension for the length of a movie. 


```
[0,1,0,70]

[0,1,0,120]

[0,0,1,200]
```


However, as there aren’t any movies with negative runtime, this dimension would 
always point in the same direction, independently of the movie length, so cosine 
similarity wouldn’t work since it ignores the vector length. The dot product is 
the better choice that allows us to consider the magnitude in addition to the 
direction.


## What Do Vector Databases Bring to LLMs?

LLMs have an input and output limit. You can’t simply put in a question about a 
book and the whole book at once to get an answer. A vector database allows you 
to store the book in easily digestible parts for an LLM.

This works by splitting the book up, converting it into a text embedding (i.e., 
encoding some text as a very big vector), and storing it into a vector database. 
The conversion into an embedding can be done with special embedding models, 
which work similarly to regular LLMs, just that they will give you a huge vector 
as an answer.

When you want to ask a question about the book via LLM, you also convert the 
question to a text embedding, use it to search the database for related vectors 
from the book, and send the question embedding together with the found book 
embeddings to your LLM.

This way, you would only have to feed your LLM parts of the book with each query 
and not the whole thing. 

This isn’t the most accurate way of solving this issue, but the alternatives 
would be to train or fine-tune an LLM with your book, which takes considerably 
more effort. Sometimes, it isn’t even possible since training requires huge 
amounts of data you don’t have.

Now that you understand why you need a vector database, we should check why you 
would use Upstash Vector.


## Why Upstash Vector?

The most crucial selling point of Upstash Vector is its serverless architecture, 
which means you just pay for what you use, and 10k daily queries and the first 
1GB of storage are free! Upstash Vector uses DiskANN and FreshDiskANN, so you 
get low query latency at a very low price. $0.4 per 100k requests and $0.25 per 
1GB. This way, your database scales with you in performance and costs.

Upstash Vector also supports the three mentioned similarity functions, Euclidean 
Distance, Cosine Similarity, and Dot Product, and comes with SDKs for TypeScript 
and Python and a REST API.

## Summary

Software developers have used vectors in any application for over half a century, 
and they have good reasons for it. Vector algebra is a versatile math tool that 
allows us to model the real world, from geometrical spaces to texts. 

Now that everyone wants to add AI to their products, they need efficient ways, 
especially solutions to the input limitations LLMs pose. Only some people have 
the time, money, or data to train or fine-tune an LLM. 

That’s where databases like Upstash Vector come into play. So, if you want to 
build something that matters without breaking the bank, check it out!
